·燕南园 Yan Nan Yuan

燕南园因位于燕园南部而得名，占地48亩（3.2公顷），建成于20世纪20年代，园内现存17栋建筑，有自成一体的西式小楼，也有矮墙环绕的中式小院。2019年，北京市公布第一批历史建筑名单，燕南园历史建筑群位列其中。

Yan Nan Yuan, named for its location in the south of Yan Yuan, covers an area of 48 mu (3.2 hectares) and was built in the 1920s. There now are 17 small buildings in the area, including self-contained western-style buildings and Chinese-style courtyards surrounded by low walls. In 2019, when Beijing released the first batch of historical buildings, Buildings No.50-66 in Yan Nan Yuan were among them.

历史学家洪业、翦伯赞，数学家江泽涵，物理学家周培源、饶毓泰、褚圣麟，经济学家马寅初、陈岱孙，哲学家冯友兰、汤用彤、冯定，化学家张龙翔、黄子卿，语言学家王力、林焘，美学家朱光潜，生物学家沈同，文学家林庚，历史地理学家侯仁之，社会学家吴文藻和文学家冰心（谢婉莹）夫妇等都曾生活在燕南园。

Among those who once lived here were historians Hong Ye and Jian Bozan, the mathematician Jiang Zehan, physicists Zhou Peiyuan, Rao Yutai and Chu Shenglin, economists Ma Yinchu and Chen Daisun, philosophers Feng Youlan, Tang Yongtong and Fengding, chemists Zhang Longxiang and Huang Ziqing, linguists Wang Li and Lin Tao, the aesthetician Zhu Guangqian, the biologist Shen Tong; the litterateur Lin Geng, the historical geographer Hou Renzhi, the sociologist Wu Wenzao and his wife, the litterateur Bing Xin (Xie Wanying).

 

·燕南园50号:Building No. 50 in Yan Nan Yuan

该建筑是20世纪50年代扩建校园时加入燕南园的，风格与园内其他建筑迥异。北京大学图书馆原馆长、历史系教授向达先生曾居住于此。在这里，向达先生完成中西交通史、南海交通史、敦煌学等方面的诸多研究，出版倾注多年心血的学术著作《蛮书校注》。向达先生还大力促成北京大学图书馆学专修科、博物馆学专修科以及考古专业的创建。

The building was added to Yan Nan Yuan when PKU campus was expanded in the 1950s, and therefore features a significantly different style from other buildings. It was once the home of Xiang Da, former director of Peking University Library and professor of the Department of History, PKU. Here, Prof. Xiang completed his research on the history of communication between China and the West, the history of communication through the South China Sea, Dunhuang Studies, etc., and published The Annotated Book of Mán (蛮), to which he devoted many years of efforts. Besides, Prof. Xiang made great contributions to the establishment of Peking University’s specialized subjects including Library Science, Museology and Archaeology.

 

·燕南园51号: Building No. 51 in Yan Nan Yuan

这是一栋西式二层小楼，建筑西侧立着乾隆年间的花神庙碑。20世纪50～60年代，物理学家、中国现代物理学研究的先驱者之一饶毓泰先生曾住在小楼的东侧。不担任物理系主任后，先生仍然在此坚持自编讲义，为教师们开设前沿光学课程。同期数学家江泽涵先生住在小楼的西侧，在这里倾尽心血，完成学术专著《不动点类理论》。

This is a two-story western-style building, on the west side of which stands a stone tablet of a Flower God Temple dating back to Qianlong’s reign. In the 1950s and 1960s, Rao Yutai, a physicist and one of the pioneers of modern physics in China, lived in the eastern part of this house. After leaving the position as the head of the Department of Physics, Prof. Rao went on to compile handouts and offer lectures on up-to-date optics for faculties. During the same period, a mathematician named Jiang Zehan dwelled in t the western part of this house. He spared no efforts there in completing his academic monograph The Fixed Point Class Theory.

 

·燕南园52号：Building No. 52 in Yan Nan Yuan

这座二层小楼位于燕南园东北隅的小上坡处。1952年后，经济学家罗志如先生和物理化学家黄子卿先生先后入住这里，他们分别为经济科学和物理化学的发展作出巨大贡献。1967年，语言学家林焘先生入住燕南园58号，同年11月搬来这里长住。在此居住期间，林焘先生负责恢复和主持北京大学中文系语音实验室的工作，并完成中国现代语音学史上多部重要学术论著。值得一提的是，在燕南园立下这些标识牌，正是林焘先生的一大愿望。

The two-story building is located on a small upward slope in the northeast corner of Yan Nan Yuan. After 1952, the economist, Luo Zhiru, and the physical chemist, Huang Ziqing, who made enormous contributions to the development of Economics Science and Physical Chemistry respectively, moved here one after another. In 1967, Lin Tao, a linguist, lived in Building No. 58 for a temporary stay, and in November of the same year, he moved into this building for long-term residence. During this residency, Prof. Lin was in charge of restoring and presiding over the work of the phonetics lab of the Department of Chinese Language, PKU, and completed a number of significant academic articles and monographs concerning the history of Chinese modern phonetics. It is worth noting that it was one of Prof. Lin’s wishes to put up these information boards in Yan Nan Yuan.

 

·燕南园53号: Building No. 53 in Yan Nan Yuan

这座典型的西式二层小楼位于燕南园东北角。1952年后，生物学家沈同先生和历史学家齐思和先生分别住在此楼一层、二层。沈同先生开创我国综合性大学首个生物化学专业，在研究动物冬眠、营养与维生素、核酸生物化学与基因工程等方面取得许多国际领先的重大成果，他的《生物化学》大学教材经久不衰。齐思和先生学贯中西，在先秦史、近代史、世界史、中外关系史等研究领域作出开拓性贡献。

Located in the northeast corner, this is a two-story building in typical western-style. After 1952, Shen Tong, a biologist, and Qi Sihe, a historian, moved respectively into the first and second floor of the house. Shen Tong was the one who founded the biochemistry speciality firstly in a comprehensive university of China, and he attained world-leading accomplishments in studies including animal hibernation, nutrition and vitamins, nucleic acid biochemistry and genetic engineering. The college textbook Biochemistry compiled by Shen Tong is still a classic. With a thorough knowledge of both China and the West, Qi Sihe made pioneering contributions to the research on pre-Qin history, modern history, world history and Sino-foreign relations.

 

·燕南园54号： Building No. 54 in Yan Nan Yuan

这是一座西式二层小楼，坡顶灰砖墙面，开窗形式以券窗和方窗相结合。这里最早的住户是历史学家洪业先生。先生藏书丰富，这里也被命名为“健斋”，又称“无善本书屋”。先生编撰大量中国图书的工具书，主持哈佛燕京学社编纂出版古籍经、史、子、集中各类文献的索引。1952年，哲学家冯友兰先生搬入54号。北京大学原党委书记江隆基先生和原党委书记、校长陆平先生也曾在此居住。 

This is a two-story western-style building with sloping roof and gray brick walls. Some windows in the building are arched, while others are rectangular. The earliest resident here was a historian called Hong Ye. He possessed a rich collection of books, and this building was thus referred to as “Jian Zhai”, or also as “No Rare Book House”. Hong Ye compiled a large number of reference books of Chinese ancient publications, and rallied the Harvard-Yenching Institute to compile and publish indices for classical documents consisting of Confucian classics, historical records, philosophical writings and miscellaneous works. In 1952, Feng Youlan, a philosopher, moved into Building No. 54. Jiang Longji, former Party Secretary of Peking University, and Lu Ping, former Party Secretary and President of Peking University, also lived here.

 

·燕南园55号： Building No. 55 in Yan Nan Yuan

这是一座中式风格建筑。新闻学家蒋荫恩先生曾住在此处。1957年，经毛泽东主席提名，马克思主义哲学家冯定先生调至北京大学,其后长期在此居住。先生曾任中国科学院哲学社会科学学部委员。20世纪90年代后，经济学家陈岱孙先生居住于此，先生耄耋之年仍然坚持为本科生授课、指导博士生。屋前有陈先生铜像。21世纪初，这里成为诺贝尔物理学奖得主李政道先生的居所。

This is a Chinese-style building. Jiang Yin’en, a pioneer in journalism, used to live here. In 1957, with the nomination of Chairman Mao, a Marxist philosopher named Feng Ding started his long-term residence here after being transferred to Peking University. Prof. Feng was a committee member of the Department of Philosophy and Social Sciences of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. In the 1990s, the economist Chen Daisun relocated himself into the building. Despite his great age, he insisted on teaching undergraduate students and mentoring doctoral candidates. In front of the house can be found a bronze sculpture of Prof. Chen. In the early 21st century, here has become the dwelling for the Nobel Laureate in Physics, Li Zhengdao.

 

·燕南园56号：Building No. 56 in Yan Nan Yuan

这座建筑与燕南园55号形态相似、布局对称。理论物理学家、流体力学家、北京大学原校长周培源先生曾居住于此。先生在引力理论与广义相对论、湍流理论等最前沿的理论物理领域取得众多重要成果，是湍流模式理论的奠基人。先生与学生关系密切，家中大门始终敞开，“两弹一星”元勋中有大半都是他的门生。作为爱花之人，先生曾在屋前种满樱花，春来如雪，人称“周家花园”。

This building is similar in shape and symmetrical in position with Building No. 55 of Yan Nan Yuan. It was once the home of Zhou Peiyuan, a theoretical physicist, scholar of hydromechanics and former president of Peking University. As the founder of the Turbulent Model Theory, Prof.  Zhou made great achievements in the fields of the most advanced theoretical physics, including gravity theory, general relativity and turbulence theory. Prof. Zhou maintained also close relationships with his students, with the door of his home always open to welcome students visiting at any time. More than half of the scientists who contributed to the “Two Bombs, One Satellite” were his students. Prof. Zhou liked flowers very much. In front of the house he used to plant cherry trees, the blossom on which dazzled like snow in Spring breezes. And therefore people called the place the “Flower Garden of the Zhou Family”.

 

·燕南园57号： Building No. 57 in Yan Nan Yuan

这是一座中式小院，位于燕南园东南隅。1957年，哲学家冯友兰先生从燕南园54号迁至此院，并终老于此。因院内有三棵松树，先生将院子命名为“三松堂”，晚年在此整理毕生著作，结集为《三松堂全集》。先生曾任中国科学院哲学社会科学学部委员、常委。他的女儿、作家冯钟璞（笔名宗璞）也曾住在这里。

This is a Chinese-style courtyard located in the southeast nook of the area. In 1957, the philosopher Feng Youlan moved from Building No. 54 and lived here till the end of his life. Prof. Feng named this courtyard “Three Pines Hall (San Song Tang)” after the three pines here. In his late years, Feng Youlan reorganized all of his works and collected them into the book The Complete Works at Three Pines Hall. Feng was a standing Committee member of the Department of Philosophy and Social Sciences of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. His daughter, the famous writer Feng Zhongpu (with a pen name as Zong Pu) also lived here for a time.

 

·燕南园58号：Building No. 58 in Yan Nan Yuan

58号院落位于燕南园东南角，与57号结构一致、互为对称。哲学家汤用彤先生曾居住于此。先生在这里完成《魏晋玄学论稿》等著作，曾担任《哲学研究》《历史研究》杂志编委，并谆谆教导后学。先生曾任中国科学院哲学社会科学学部委员。与先生同住此地的家人们也成就非凡，其子汤一介先生同为哲学家，曾担任《儒藏》编纂中心主任、首席专家；汤一介先生夫人、文学理论家乐黛云先生是中国比较文学的拓荒者。

Located in the southeast corner of Yan Nan Yuan, Building No. 58 has the same structure as No. 57 and they are symmetrical to each other. The philosopher Tang Yongtong once lived here. He completed works such as Metaphysics in Wei and Jin Dynasties here, and served as a member of the editorial committee of Research on Philosophy and Research on History, while earnestly tutoring his students. Prof. Tang was a committee member of the Department of Philosophy and Social Sciences of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. His family members who lived together with him also attained extraordinary achievements. His son, Prof. Tang Yijie, was also a philosopher and once worked as the director and chief expert for the Editorial and Research Center of Confucian canon, PKU. Tang Yijie’s wife, Prof. Yue Daiyun, a literary theorist, is a pioneer in comparative literature in China.

 

·燕南园59号：Building No. 59 in Yan Nan Yuan

这座庭院与55号、56号风格相似。高厚德先生曾居住于此。他积极推动燕京大学成立，对燕南园乃至燕京大学的建设和发展贡献巨大。他的主要研究方向为中国古代教育，著有《中国教育制度史》。抗战胜利后，燕京大学复校，物理学家褚圣麟先生入住这里，后任北京大学物理系主任。先生坚持参与基础课教学，所编教材《原子物理学》被许多高校采用。

 

This courtyard resembles No. 55 and No. 56 in style. Howard S. Galt used to reside here. He was one of the founders of Yenching University and contributed greatly to the establishment and development of Yan Nan Yuan and to the University as a whole. Howard Galt’s focused on traditional Chinese education studies and compiled the book China’s History of Education System. After the end of War of Chinese People's Resistance Against Japanese Aggression, Yenching University moved back to Yan Yuan, and the physicist Chu Shenglin came here and later worked as the head of the Department of Physics, PKU. He insisted on participating in teaching fundamental courses, and his textbook, Atomic Physics, was adopted by numerous universities and colleges.

·燕南园60号：Building No. 60 in Yan Nan Yuan

这是一栋结构精巧的西式二层洋楼，处于燕南园中心位置。心理学教授夏仁德先生曾居住于此。他支持学生爱国运动，在“一二·九”等运动中大力保护学生。未名湖畔立有刻着夏仁德先生姓名与生卒年的石碑。20世纪50年代开始，语言学家王力先生在此居住，先生在这里完成关于中国语言学研究的大部分论著，他的古代汉语教材以及古代汉语字典至今仍在广泛使用。先生曾任中国科学院哲学社会科学学部委员。

Here in the center of Yan Nan Yuan stands a two-story western-style building with exquisite structure. Randolph C. Sailer, a psychology professor, used to live here. He was an ardent supporter of students’ patriotic activities including the December 9th Movement in 1935, and had made vigorous efforts in protecting students ever since. By the side of the Weiming Lake, there is a stone tablet engraved with his name as well as his birth and death dates. In the 1950s, the linguist Wang Li moved in and completed most of his works on Chinese linguistics here. His ancient Chinese textbooks and ancient Chinese dictionaries are still in wide use. Wang Li was a committee member of the Department of Philosophy and Social Sciences of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

 

·燕南园61号：Building No. 61 in Yan Nan Yuan

这是一座西式的二层砖石小楼。中国历史地理学的奠基人和开拓者侯仁之先生曾在此居住超过半个世纪。先生第一个明确区分了“沿革地理”与“历史地理”的区别，系统提出了发展历史地理学的“四论”；他的著作《北平历史地理》以及主编的《北京历史地图集》是城市历史地理研究的典范；他开拓了沙漠历史地理的新领域，还推动中国加入《世界文化与自然遗产公约》。未名湖畔的“未名湖”“文水陂”两方刻石，为侯仁之先生亲手所书。

 

This is a two-story masonry building in western-style. Hou Renzhi, the founder and pioneer of China’s historical geography, lived here for over half a century. Prof. Hou was the first to distinguish between “evolutional geography” and “historical geography” and made a systematic exposition of the “four arguments” of the development of historical geography. The book An Historical Geography of Peiping he wrote and The Historical Atlas of Beijing he edited were exemplary in the research of urban historical geography. He broke new ground in the field of historical geography of deserts, and promoted China’s acceding to the Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage. The inscriptions “Wei Ming Hu” (Weiming Lake) and “Wen Shui Po” (Wenshui Hillside) on the two stones standing by the Weiming Lake were written by Hou Renzhi.

 

·燕南园62号：Building No. 62 in Yan Nan Yuan

这是一座“凹”字型的中式风格平房，坐落在燕南园南部。社会学家、社会活动家雷洁琼先生曾居住在这里。雷洁琼先生是中国民主促进会的主要创始人和卓越领导人。1952年后，现代诗人、文史学家林庚先生搬到这里。先生在这里完成《中国文学简史》《唐诗综论》等学术论著，培养出一大批优秀学人。

      

The U-shaped Chinese bungalow, located in the south of Yan Nan Yuan, was once the dwelling place of the sociology and social activist Lei Jieqiong. Prof. Lei was the principal founder and prominent leader of the China Association for Promoting Democracy. After 1952, Lin Geng, a modern poet and scholar of literature and history, moved here, where he completed a number of academic books including A Brief History of Chinese Literature and A Comprehensive Study of Tang Poetry, while bringing up an array of outstanding researchers on Chinese language and culture.

 

·燕南园63号：Building No. 63 in Yan Nan Yuan

这是一座中式风格院落，五开间庑殿顶，屋檐上雕有脊兽，结构精巧。1952年北京大学迁入燕园后，经济学家和人口学家、时任北京大学校长马寅初先生搬入燕南园63号，他著名的《新人口论》完成于此。1975年，语言学家魏建功也曾入住此宅，他主持编撰《新华字典》，并参与汉字简化工作。两位先生均曾任中国科学院哲学社会科学学部委员。

 

This Chinese courtyard has five bays in width with a hipped roof. Up on the ridges there are delicately carved animals. Since Peking University moved in Yan Yuan in 1952, Ma Yinchu, an economist and demographic scholar, as well as the president of PKU at the time, settled in No. 63 Yan Nan Yuan. His well-known book, New Population Theory, was completed while he was here. In 1975, the linguist Wei Jiangong also moved in. He was in charge of compiling Xinhua Dictionary and played a part in the simplification of Chinese characters. Both of these masters were committee members of the Department of Philosophy and Social Sciences of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

 

·燕南园64号：Building No. 64 in Yan Nan Yuan

这是一排东西向的平房，在燕南园的十七栋建筑中结构最为简单。在燕京大学时期，这里曾经是教职员工的集体宿舍。20世纪60～70年代，继续作为集体宿舍使用。中国马克思主义史学重要奠基人之一翦伯赞先生曾在这里短暂居住。

Here is a row of east-west bungalows with the simplest structure among the seventeen buildings in Yan Nan Yuan. During the days of Yenching University, it was used as a dormitory for the faculty and staff. In 1960s to 70s, it served the same purpose. Here once lived Jian Bozan, one of the significant founders of China’s Marxist historiography.

 

·燕南园65号：Building No. 65 in Yan Nan Yuan

这是一栋西式单层建筑。新中国成立后，曾任北京大学哲学系系主任的郑昕先生和《古兰经》权威中译本译者马坚先生均曾在此短住，法学家芮沐先生后来长期居住于此。1947年起，芮沐先生任北京大学教授，其一生的成就大半都在这间屋子中完成。先生创立中国经济法学和国际经济法学学科，并亲自编写教材、授课教学，建立北京大学经济法与国际经济法研究所。

This is a western-style single-story building. Since the founding of the People’s Republic of China, Zheng Xin, the former head of the Department of Philosophy of PKU, and Ma Jian, the translator of the Koran, made a short stay here. Later, jurist Rui Mu lived here for a long time. Rui Mu became a professor of Peking University since 1947, and most of his life's achievements were accomplished in this building. He set up the discipline of Chinese Economic Law and International Economic Law, taught courses using textbooks written by himself, and established the Institute of Economic Law and International Economic Law of Peking University.

 

·燕南园66号：Building No. 66 in Yan Nan Yuan

这是一座精致的西式二层小楼，与第二体育馆隔墙相望，曾是社会学家吴文藻先生和文学家冰心（谢婉莹）先生夫妇的住所。两位先生在一楼客厅摆放了许多报纸和学术刊物，很多师生都前来一睹为快，这里一度以燕京大学的“期刊阅览室”闻名。20世纪70年代末，美学家朱光潜先生搬入此楼，整理了《谈美书简》等作品。先生曾任中国科学院哲学社会科学学部委员。

This elegant two-story building in western-style, close to the Second Gymnasium, was once the residence of the sociologist Wu Wenzao and the litterateur Bing Xin (Xie Wanying), who were husband and wife. They placed many newspapers and academic publications in their living room on the first floor, which was well-known as the "Periodical Reading Room" of Yenching University and which attracted lots of teachers and students to come for reading. In the late 1970s, the aesthetician Zhu Guangqian moved into the building, where he published works including his Letters on Beauty. Prof. Zhu was a committee member of the Department of Philosophy and Social Sciences of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

 

 

·燕京大学遗存井盖

The well cover is a historical remain of Yenching University.

 

喷泉 Fountain

该喷泉工程利用海绵城市理念，采用地面渗透、雨水花园、雨水收集罐等措施，对雨水进行收集、处理，通过绿化灌溉及涌泉等形式进行循环使用。

 

Based on the idea of a “sponge city”, the fountain engineering project collects and processes rainwater through ground-surface infiltration, rain gardens and rainwater collection tanks, and recycles the water by greenbelt irrigation and surge flows.

 

燕南园道路 Yan Nan Yuan Road

燕南园洋灰路系抗日战争结束燕京大学复校校园修整工程的一部分。据校友回忆，燕京大学职工从西郊机场附近旱河运来沙石，采用脱浆彩石混凝土工艺修建该路。2022年北京大学实施燕南园环境提升工程，按照原工艺保护与修复180米较完整的洋灰路。

燕南园其他主体路面采用的环保型生态透水砖，由北京大学材料科学与工程学院王习东教授团队自主研发与生产。该透水砖以大宗工业固体废弃物为主要原料，具有高强度、高透水性和抗冻融性；雨水可迅速渗入地下，持续改善表层土壤生态环境。

 

The cement road was part of the campus renovation project of Yenching University after the end of the War of Chinese People's Resistance Against Japanese Aggression. As alumni recalled, it was the Yenching University staff who transported sand and gravel from a dry river near Xijiao Airport, and built the road using a special concrete technology. In 2022, an environmental improvement project has been implemented by Peking University in Yan Nan Yuan, aiming to protect and repair, according to the original process, 180 meters of cement road that is in relatively good condition.

 

The other main roads of Yan Nan Yuan are paved with environment-friendly ecological permeable bricks, which are independently developed and produced by the team of Professor Wang Xidong from the School of Materials Science and Engineering of Peking University. Using bulk industrial solid waste as the main raw materials, permeable bricks have high strength, high water permeability, and freeze-thaw resistance; the rainwater can quickly penetrate into the ground and continuously improve the ecological environment of the surface soil.